README.md, before:

# CoreDataOperation

Adding concurrency/multi-threading to `CoreData` is not very straightforward and obvious. The main issue is with `NSManagedObjectContext`, which is thread unsafe. The default one created in `AppDelegate` is created on the main thread:

```swift
var managedObjectContext = NSManagedObjectContext(concurrencyType: .MainQueueConcurrencyType)
```

The main drawback of using `AppDelegate`'s managed object context is that whenever a save, fetch or delete operation is performed, the main thread/UI will get blocked. If you are doing small operations, this may not be noticeable. But for larger operations, it will pose a problem.

The solution is to do such `CoreData` operations in the background and only when you have to do any UI changes, say reloading a table, you call `reloadData` on the main queue.

# Installation

CocoaPods is the preferred way to install this library. Add this command to your `Podfile`:

```
pod 'CoreDataOperation'
```

### Objective-C

Check out [ASJCoreDataOperation](https://github.com/sudeepjaiswal/ASJCoreDataOperation).

# Background

* **Key:** `NSManagedObjectContext` = `moc`

### Concurrency options
There are three concurrency types defined in `NSManagedObjectContext`:
- `ConfinementConcurrencyType` (which is marked deprecated from iOS 9.0)
- `PrivateQueueConcurrencyType`
- `MainQueueConcurrencyType`

You should not use `ConfinementConcurrencyType` anymore since it's obsolete and Apple doesn't recommend it. `PrivateQueueConcurrencyType` creates an `moc` on a background thread and `MainQueueConcurrencyType` creates one on the main queue. The one we are interested in is `PrivateQueueConcurrencyType`.

### Creating an `NSManagedObjectContext`

You can create as many `moc`s as you wish. During saving, it must go through an `NSPersistentStoreCoordinator` to write data to an sqlite file. You can use the one implemented in `AppDelegate` or provide your own. Just make sure that no matter what kind of store your app has; `NSSQLiteStoreType`, `NSBinaryStoreType` or `NSInMemoryStoreType`, the coordinator object must be tied to the same destination.

```swift
var privateMoc = NSManagedObjectContext(concurrencyType: .PrivateQueueConcurrencyType)
privateMoc.persistentStoreCoordinator = appDelegatesPersistentStoreCoordinator;
```

There are two methods for `moc`s, `performBlock(block: () -> Void)` and `performBlockAndWait(block: () -> Void)`. Any code written in those blocks is **guaranteed** to be executed on the same queue the `moc` is created. You **must** write your `CoreData` logic inside one of these methods. The difference between the two is that `performBlockAndWait()` will block the queue until it's operation is completed.

### Saving on a private queue

Whenever a `save` happens on a private `moc`, data will be written to the sqlite file but the main queue will not be notified about it. If you have an `NSFetchedResultsController` setup on the main queue, control will **not** reach its delegate methods. However, if the `CoreData` operation and `NSFetchedResultsController` share the same `moc`, it will work.

If you need the main queue to be notified about any changes made by a private context, you need to merge those changes from the private `moc` to the main `moc`. To do so, you have to start observing for `NSManagedObjectContextDidSaveNotification` on the private `moc`.

```swift
NSNotificationCenter.defaultCenter().addObserver(self, selector: "contextDidSave:", name: NSManagedObjectContextDidSaveNotification, object: privateMoc)
```

In `contextDidSave:` we need to merge the private `moc` changes into the main `moc`. You MUST use the `moc`'s `performBlock()` or `performBlockAndWait()` methods to ensure the merge happens on the correct thread.

```swift
func contextDidSave(note: NSNotification)
{
  mainMoc.performBlock { () -> Void in
    self.mainMoc.mergeChangesFromContextDidSaveNotification(note)
  }
}
```

The `note` object has information of all modifications made to the managed objects. There can be issues however when merging data between two `moc`s and conflicts may arise. So, you must provide a `mergePolicy` so that `CoreData` knows how to resolve them.

```swift
privateMoc.mergePolicy = NSMergeByPropertyObjectTrumpMergePolicy
```

* **Note:** There is another concurrency pattern, using child and parent `moc`s which has a simpler setup but it is not recommended because it blocks the main queue.

# What this library does

`CoreDataOperation` is a subclass of `NSOperation` that provides private queue support out of the box. This class is designed to be subclassed and **will not** work without it.

```swift
convenience init(privateMoc: NSManagedObjectContext!, mainMoc: NSManagedObjectContext!)
```
This is a convenience method to create an instance of your subclass. You may pass `nil` in both arguments or use the `init()` method. In those cases, a private moc will be created and `AppDelegate`'s `moc` will be accessed to be used as the `mainMoc`. If your `AppDelegate` does not have an `moc` object, you must provide one that is created on the main queue.

```swift
public var privateMoc: NSManagedObjectContext!
```
Irrespective of the way the private `moc` is created, it is publicly exposed and you may use it, say to tie an `NSFetchedResultsController` to it and do asynchronous fetches.

```swift 
public func coreDataOperation()
```
This is the method you are **required** to override in your subclass. Any `CoreData` operations you wish to perform should be written here. The library will ensure that this method is called on the correct thread.

### Usage

```swift
var operationQueue = NSOperationQueue()
let operation = SomeCoreDataOperationSubclass(privateMoc: self.photosPrivateMoc, mainMoc: nil)
operationQueue.addOperation(operation)
```
As soon the `operation` is added to the `operationQueue`, it will start running on a background queue.

# Credits

- To [Manish Pathak](https://github.com/manish-1988) for the motivation.

# To-do

- A completion block to know when operation is complete
- A way to cancel operation midway

# License

`CoreDataOperation` is available under the MIT license. See the LICENSE file for more info.

Commit message:

added note for obj-c library

README.md, after:

# CoreDataOperation

Adding concurrency/multi-threading to `CoreData` is not very straightforward and obvious. The main issue is with `NSManagedObjectContext`, which is thread unsafe. The default one created in `AppDelegate` is created on the main thread:

```swift
var managedObjectContext = NSManagedObjectContext(concurrencyType: .MainQueueConcurrencyType)
```

The main drawback of using `AppDelegate`'s managed object context is that whenever a save, fetch or delete operation is performed, the main thread/UI will get blocked. If you are doing small operations, this may not be noticeable. But for larger operations, it will pose a problem.

The solution is to do such `CoreData` operations in the background and only when you have to do any UI changes, say reloading a table, you call `reloadData` on the main queue.

# Installation

CocoaPods is the preferred way to install this library. Add this command to your `Podfile`:

```
pod 'CoreDataOperation'
```

### Objective-C

For the same library in `Objective-C`, see [ASJCoreDataOperation](https://github.com/sudeepjaiswal/ASJCoreDataOperation).

# Background

* **Key:** `NSManagedObjectContext` = `moc`

### Concurrency options
There are three concurrency types defined in `NSManagedObjectContext`:
- `ConfinementConcurrencyType` (which is marked deprecated from iOS 9.0)
- `PrivateQueueConcurrencyType`
- `MainQueueConcurrencyType`

You should not use `ConfinementConcurrencyType` anymore since it's obsolete and Apple doesn't recommend it. `PrivateQueueConcurrencyType` creates an `moc` on a background thread and `MainQueueConcurrencyType` creates one on the main queue. The one we are interested in is `PrivateQueueConcurrencyType`.

### Creating an `NSManagedObjectContext`

You can create as many `moc`s as you wish. During saving, it must go through an `NSPersistentStoreCoordinator` to write data to an sqlite file. You can use the one implemented in `AppDelegate` or provide your own. Just make sure that no matter what kind of store your app has; `NSSQLiteStoreType`, `NSBinaryStoreType` or `NSInMemoryStoreType`, the coordinator object must be tied to the same destination.

```swift
var privateMoc = NSManagedObjectContext(concurrencyType: .PrivateQueueConcurrencyType)
privateMoc.persistentStoreCoordinator = appDelegatesPersistentStoreCoordinator;
```

There are two methods for `moc`s, `performBlock(block: () -> Void)` and `performBlockAndWait(block: () -> Void)`. Any code written in those blocks is **guaranteed** to be executed on the same queue the `moc` is created. You **must** write your `CoreData` logic inside one of these methods. The difference between the two is that `performBlockAndWait()` will block the queue until it's operation is completed.

### Saving on a private queue

Whenever a `save` happens on a private `moc`, data will be written to the sqlite file but the main queue will not be notified about it. If you have an `NSFetchedResultsController` setup on the main queue, control will **not** reach its delegate methods. However, if the `CoreData` operation and `NSFetchedResultsController` share the same `moc`, it will work.

If you need the main queue to be notified about any changes made by a private context, you need to merge those changes from the private `moc` to the main `moc`. To do so, you have to start observing for `NSManagedObjectContextDidSaveNotification` on the private `moc`.

```swift
NSNotificationCenter.defaultCenter().addObserver(self, selector: "contextDidSave:", name: NSManagedObjectContextDidSaveNotification, object: privateMoc)
```

In `contextDidSave:` we need to merge the private `moc` changes into the main `moc`. You MUST use the `moc`'s `performBlock()` or `performBlockAndWait()` methods to ensure the merge happens on the correct thread.

```swift
func contextDidSave(note: NSNotification)
{
  mainMoc.performBlock { () -> Void in
    self.mainMoc.mergeChangesFromContextDidSaveNotification(note)
  }
}
```

The `note` object has information of all modifications made to the managed objects. There can be issues however when merging data between two `moc`s and conflicts may arise. So, you must provide a `mergePolicy` so that `CoreData` knows how to resolve them.

```swift
privateMoc.mergePolicy = NSMergeByPropertyObjectTrumpMergePolicy
```

* **Note:** There is another concurrency pattern, using child and parent `moc`s which has a simpler setup but it is not recommended because it blocks the main queue.

# What this library does

`CoreDataOperation` is a subclass of `NSOperation` that provides private queue support out of the box. This class is designed to be subclassed and **will not** work without it.

```swift
convenience init(privateMoc: NSManagedObjectContext!, mainMoc: NSManagedObjectContext!)
```
This is a convenience method to create an instance of your subclass. You may pass `nil` in both arguments or use the `init()` method. In those cases, a private moc will be created and `AppDelegate`'s `moc` will be accessed to be used as the `mainMoc`. If your `AppDelegate` does not have an `moc` object, you must provide one that is created on the main queue.

```swift
public var privateMoc: NSManagedObjectContext!
```
Irrespective of the way the private `moc` is created, it is publicly exposed and you may use it, say to tie an `NSFetchedResultsController` to it and do asynchronous fetches.

```swift 
public func coreDataOperation()
```
This is the method you are **required** to override in your subclass. Any `CoreData` operations you wish to perform should be written here. The library will ensure that this method is called on the correct thread.

### Usage

```swift
var operationQueue = NSOperationQueue()
let operation = SomeCoreDataOperationSubclass(privateMoc: self.photosPrivateMoc, mainMoc: nil)
operationQueue.addOperation(operation)
```
As soon the `operation` is added to the `operationQueue`, it will start running on a background queue.

# Credits

- To [Manish Pathak](https://github.com/manish-1988) for the motivation.

# To-do

- A completion block to know when operation is complete
- A way to cancel operation midway

# License

`CoreDataOperation` is available under the MIT license. See the LICENSE file for more info.
